trd104: add explicit type summary for syscalls (#4228)
tock/tock: doc/reference/trd104-syscalls.md

commands. A future 64-bit ABI MAY choose to combine these into one syscall
register. In contrast, other syscall argument slots may have more generic
purposes, where the type and underlying storage are likely to move in sync on
future platforms. This document defines the following conceptual types:

 - `OPAQUE_NUMERIC`: This describes an argument akin to C's `(unsigned) int`,
   i.e., a whole number which is capable of being expressed in a native machine
   word type.
 - `[OPAQUE_]SIZE`: This describes an argument akin to C's `size_t`, i.e.,
   an unsigned, numeric type with a range capable of expressing in bytes the
   size of any valid _contiguous_ object.
 - `[OPAQUE_]POINTER_OR_ZERO`: This describes an argument similar to C's
   `uintptr_t`, i.e., a type capable of holding a pointer to a valid memory
   location OR the value `0`, which is defined as the NULL sentinel.
 - `C_FUNCTION_POINTER_OR_ZERO`: This describes an argument which holds a
   pointer to an executable function, where the function adheres to the
   standard C ABI for the platform (akin to `extern C` in C++ or `extern "C"
   fn` in Rust) OR the value `0`, which is defined as the NULL sentinel.

>  - `OPAQUE_GENERIC`: This describes an argument with no restrictions on type.

Reviewer: I think this would be better as a table (conceptual type, C inspiration, description)

Author: Done.

The register arguments for Subscribe system calls are as follows. The
registers r0-r3 correspond to r0-r3 on CortexM and a0-a3 on RISC-V.

| Argument            | Register | Type               |
|---------------------|----------|--------------------|
| Driver number       | r0       | `u32`              |
| Subscribe number    | r1       | `u32`              |

> | Upcall pointer      | r2       | C_FUNCTION_POINTER |

Reviewer: Is there a meaningful way to specify the function signature of this upcall pointer? Do we even document that today?

I'm asking because working on the isolated nonvolatile storage API, in light of this discussion, I am removing the length fields and using the allow sizes instead. However, it is still useful to be able to do a "get size" command that provides the number of bytes via an upcall. I want to future proof that as a `uint64_t`.

Author: The closest we come is this: https://github.com/tock/tock/blob/master/doc/reference/trd104-syscalls.md#52-subscribe

Which would put `void (subscribe_upcall)(int, int, int, void*);` in place there.

I think something more in the spirit of the rest of the documentation would be `fn(u32, u32, u32, POINTER_OR_ZERO) -> ()`. 

Or the exhaustive set of patterns to cover your use case might be: `fn({u32,i32,u64_lo,i64_lo}, {u32,i32,u64_hi,i64_hi}, {u32,i32}, POINTER_OR_ZERO) -> ()`?

The register arguments for Command system calls are as follows. The registers
r0-r3 correspond to r0-r3 on CortexM and a0-a3 on RISC-V.

| Argument          | Register | Type  |
|-------------------|----------|-------|
| Driver number     | r0       | `u32` |
| Command number    | r1       | `u32` |

> | Argument 0        | r2       | `u32` |

Reviewer 2: In the meeting today we discussed whether argument should be u32s, or usize, or "Opaque register". I liked usize because on 32-bit system its the same width as u32, but would hopefully align more closely with what I imagine trd105 will be.

I would like to add that I think its important for it _not_ to be an opaque register if an opaque register means whatever MachineRegister ends up being. I really do not want people to try to pass pointers through here, especially on CHERI machines, as they should not be allowed to sneak authority through to a capsule. Allow allow/subscribe etc should be allowed to pass authority.

In practice, the ABI for all of these arguments is to pass through a machine register. The type here is more accurately what the kernel will plan to abstract from them after, which should _not_ be CapabilityPtr for arguments, but I feel should be usize.

follows. The registers r0-r3 correspond to r0-r3 on CortexM and a0-a3
on RISC-V.

| Argument         | Register | Type               | Value                                                            |
|------------------|----------|--------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Driver number    | r0       | `u32`              |                                                                  |
| Allow number     | r1       | `u32`              |                                                                  |

> | Address          | r2       | `&mut [u32; {r3}]` | Pointer to array of userspace memory of length `{r3}` **or** `0` |

Reviewer: I'm not sure we can/should be this specific for `address`. What would it mean to violate this? Unless the memory would go beyond the app's space then this would be satisfied.

Author: > I'm not sure we can/should be this specific for `address`. What would it mean to violate this? Unless the memory would go beyond the app's space then this would be satisfied.

I updated this to actually be slightly more specific, i.e. 
> Pointer to array of **writeable** userspace memory of length `{r3}` **or** `0`

I believe that now more directly matches the TRD text, and the answer is that `r2`'s value either meets that criteria or the syscall will return `INVALID`.

> | Size             | r3       | `u32`              |                                                                  |

Author: I argue no: https://github.com/tock/tock/pull/4228#issuecomment-2474953763

> | Size             | r3       | `u32`             |                                                                           |

Reviewer 3: One hitch here is that, actually, `ReadWriteAllow` uses `usize`, which is somewhat meaningful because it represents the length of an array which, in Rust and C and most languages is generally represented as word-sized (which makes sense since the word size generally limits the address space as well, so a 32-bit platform can't address an array larger than 4GB but a 64-bit platform can).

Author: Well yes and no. IIUC, the Rust usize conflated the C size_t and uintptr_t.

That was a fine enough thing to do because early Rust only targeted modern x86/64 and ARM, where that holds (note the modern qualifier is quite necessary there; e.g. MS-DoS's highmem is basically a form of bank switching or really anything that actually uses segments generally requires that objects fit in one segment but the pointer tells both which segment and where (size_t < ptr_t); more embedded-y example AVR today still uses segments with 24-bit addresses on 16-bit arch). And of course CHERI similarly exposes why one usize type can't represent both length and position.

I think my opposition to expressing anything in our syscall ABI in terms of usize comes from this observation that usize as-is is broken. The rust community is trying to figure out how to reckon with that reality. We don't have to.

As C types are sort of the lingua franca for FFI still, it probably would be better to use them in the Type column here; or perhaps to just have explicit Rust type and C type columns...

The register arguments for Command system calls are as follows. The registers
r0-r3 correspond to r0-r3 on CortexM and a0-a3 on RISC-V.

| Argument          | Register | Type                                                 |
|-------------------|----------|------------------------------------------------------|
| Driver number     | r0       | `u32`                                                |
| Command number    | r1       | `u32`                                                |
| Argument 0        | r2       | `{u8, i8, u16, i16, u32, i32, SIZE, OPAQUE_NUMERIC}` |

> | Argument 1        | r3       | `{u8, i8, u16, i16, u32, i32, SIZE, OPAQUE_NUMERIC}` |

Reviewer: This, in practice, forces the command syscall in the kernel to use `usize`. I think that is a mistake. Even if `OPAQUE_NUMERIC` was removed from this document, it isn't clear to me how to enforce that this is always used as `SIZE` and not as `OPAQUE_NUMERIC`.

Author: You mean at the generic dispatch layer? I think that's always going to be the case so long as we allow command arguments to hold lengths (e.g. `arg1` use in console).

Are you suggesting the list should be reduced to `{u8, i8, u16, i16, u32, i32}`? (And just assume that any "length" a command might use won't need the full possible bounds)? That feels awkward, and a confusing restriction to impose.

We could prevent 'abuse' of `OPAQUE_NUMERIC` by implementing some kind of `CommandArgType` which doesn't implement a conversion to `u64`, but that feels a bit heavy-handed in its way. I feel like this is a case where enforcement will need to come at the human layer; there's a finite number of defined syscall APIs, and they like HILs are easily "seen" in review.

Reviewer: >Are you suggesting the list should be reduced to {u8, i8, u16, i16, u32, i32}? (And just assume that any "length" a command might use won't need the full possible bounds)? That feels awkward, and a confusing restriction to impose.

Yes, see my [comment](https://github.com/tock/tock/pull/4228#issuecomment-2607946317) above. TLDR: console should just print the entire allowed buffer.

Author: That sounds like an interesting concept for a Tock 3.0 ABI and a reasonable enhancement for TRD105 — I'm not sure it's something we can or should include as a restriction for TRD104 (which is really trying to document precisely what Tock 2.0 actually does at this point).

Author: To wit: The [console driver is a stable API](https://github.com/tock/tock/tree/trd104-explicit-types/doc/syscalls#base)

Reviewer: I don't literally mean we should change the driver, but just that in hindsight we should have done it this way. Since all of our boards only support 32 bits we are fine. 64 bit platforms don't need to print 5 billion characters at a time.

Author: I think I agree with you, I'm just not sure what if anything should change in _this_ PR.

I think a change like that to the _design_ of Command should be a follow-on PR, either to TRD104, or really probably as part of a TRD for 3.0.

Reviewer: I think TRD104 is our go-to place to design command, and this PR, in my opinion, does change the design. I maintained the belief that arg0 and arg1 were `u32` (which wasn't really specified), and this change makes that certainly not the case.

Author: I can see that point. For quick reference for others, what's there now (pre-PR):
> https://github.com/tock/tock/blob/master/doc/reference/trd104-syscalls.md#43-command-class-id-2
> [...]
> "Argument 0 and argument 1 are unsigned 32-bit integers."

---

So, pivoting this to _The Design Question_ you [raised the in comment above](https://github.com/tock/tock/pull/4228#issuecomment-2607946317), namely, should command arguments allow for anything >32 bits?

### I've started a document looking through all current uses of command here: https://hackmd.io/wJgObQvARD2UmpsaNiONlw

We have 73 implementations of `fn command(..` in `capsules/` currently.

Lots of things "use" `usize` currently, but don't need to per se. Obviously all of the current uses would function fine with `u32` instead (since `usize==u32` on all current platforms). What I'm trying to do is look at the _semantics_ to see if we have an example of something that would be meaningfully limited if we couldn't use SIZE as a command argument.

I'll probably not get through all 73 right now, but a working list / start of use cases for arg0/arg1 currently:
 - Used as an array index for some modest-sized internal array (e.g., which gpio, which led).
    - This category has no reasonable scenario where the actual value would exceed `u32` (or frankly would never exceed a `u8`)
 - Match statements with constants
     - ...that would probably compile unchanged if `arg1` were a `u32` instead of a `usize`.
 - As a length specifier (read/write this many bytes)
     - All the use cases I've seen thus far would be covered by the "use the allowed buffer length and save a parameter" proposal; will highlight if that changes
  - **Breaking change**: Low-level debug approximates the `OPAQUE_GENERIC`, it blindly passes 1-2 `usize` arguments to be printed
     - Low-level debug is certainly a more contrived case, but it would be somewhat restrictive to say that the interface could, e.g., no longer print pointers.
     - This could easily be mitigated by only allowing debug to print one parameter (using two arguments for a 64-bit value to print)

Author: tl;dr—looking at how command arguments are used currently, there are three cases where restricting arguments to 32 bits will make interfaces awkward/problematic:

1. Debug support; becomes harder for userspace to easily print 'native' types (limited concern)
2. Lower-level APIs ("near-MMIO passthrough"); when APIs largely 'pass through' peripherals, this creates a lot of boilerplate churn for little value (modest concern)
3. Opaque references to **external** memories; when there isn't a buffer to allow per se, as it's not local data, but a reference to an external device — will need to encode pointers and lengths. This may add non-trivial overhead to common-case uses (biggest concern)

Reviewer: These concern me:

> As a packed u32 with some mix of the above.
> 
>     Plainly a non-issue as it's an argument type optimized to be u32
> 
> Already a split u64
> 
>     i.e., use cases that could be made more compact on a 64-bit system, but are likely not worth the µ-opt
>     ex: 15.4 concatenates arg0/1 to create a full length address (a 64-bit value)
> 

As they will only work today because they were tested on a 32 bit platform; if command allowed 64 bit parameters then the entire address would have just been encoded in one argument.

Reviewer: In the external memory case, it would need to be a memory with a >32 bit address space. Why shouldn't a 32 bit MCU be able to use that particular external flash as well? This is why I think it is important that those arguments are _not_ based on the size of the MCU's register.

Author: Following that.. I wonder if we should just be explicit, something like: "commands are allowed two arguments with types of up-to 32-bits of underlying storage, or one 64-bit argument"
```
| Argument 0        | r2       | `{u8, i8, u16, i16, u32, i32, u64_low, i64_low}`
| Argument 1        | r3       | `{u8, i8, u16, i16, u32, i32, u64_hi, i64_hi}`
```
i.e., be explicit that sometimes it makes sense to pass **a** 64-bit value as a command argument, and we have an opinion about how that shall be broken up on a 32-bit platform [then, on a 64-bit platform, the ABI could choose to pass the **one** 64-bit argument in a single register, and disallow use of the last register as a transparent performance optimization].

Reviewer: I think if we list all of the types explicitly then, yes, I think it makes sense to specify how we expect a u64 to be encoded.

Author: re external memories: I think there's a deeper design question here around _ownership_.

By default, the kernel owns all of the local memory map (i.e., XIP Flash, SRAM, MMIO, etc) and then gives apps access to pieces of the memory map. In some cases, i.e., allow, processes 'give' some of that memory back to the kernel—but, critically, they can only _give back_ memory they were _given by the kernel_ in the first place.

With external memories, it's less clear what the ownership/permission case is right now. i.e., I think the current interfaces (which are largely older/historical/etc) are more low-level-y, assuming apps could write any part of flash at their discretion, etc.

I wonder if the better design point might be for capsules that enable access to external memories (flash, tertiary sram, etc) to own all that external memory by default, which it might give to a specific app (perhaps when an app requests it, etc), and then apps can follow the same allow (probably a parallel `external_allow` syscall or something) paradigm for asking the kernel to operate on external buffers.

The register arguments for Command system calls are as follows. The registers
r0-r3 correspond to r0-r3 on CortexM and a0-a3 on RISC-V.

| Argument          | Register | Type                         |
|-------------------|----------|------------------------------|
| Driver number     | r0       | `u32`                        |
| Command number    | r1       | `u32`                        |
| Argument 0        | r2       | `{u32, i32, u64_lo, i64_lo}` |
| Argument 1        | r3       | `{u32, i32, u64_hi, i64_hi}` |

> > When passing values derived from types whose representation is smaller than
> > the native machine register width (e.g. `u8`, `i16`), they must be explicitly
> > cast to a type whose storage matches the native machine register width in a
> > manner which compels the compiler to emit code which actually updates the
> > underlying storage. Signed values must use the native signed type, i.e., an
> > `i8` must not be cast to a `u32`.

Reviewer: Why is this a quote?

Also, I don't think we can specify this based on what a compiler might do, because ultimately what needs to happen is the u32 containing something else (say a u8) must match what the capsule does to get the u8 from the u32.

```suggestion
When passing values with types whose representation is smaller than
32 bits (e.g. `u8` or `i16`), they must be explicitly
cast to a `u32` (if unsigned) or `i32` (if signed).
```

follows. The registers r0-r3 correspond to r0-r3 on CortexM and a0-a3
on RISC-V.

> | Argument         | Register | Type              | Additional Restrictions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Argument         | Register | Type              | Additional Restrictions                                                                 |
```
I guess github does the right thing but

Author: fixed.
